Re-write of Cytokine Storm Section (#636)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/07.pathogenesis.md

#### Cytokine Release Syndrome

Symptoms of a disease can be caused by a pathogen, but they can also be caused by the immune system's reaction to the pathogen.
A dysregulated immune response can cause significant damage to the host [@isbn:9780815332183; @isbn:9780071283663; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].
The inflammatory response has received particular attention for its role in both a healthy response to infection and a pathogenic one.
Inflammation is one of the most visible components of the immune response, as it is responsible for hallmarks of injury such as pain, swelling, etc. [@doi:10.18632/oncotarget.23208].
In response to injury or to signaling by PRRs upon detection of a pathogen, the immune system stimulates leukocytes that travel to the site of the threat, where they then produce cytokines [@doi:10.18632/oncotarget.23208].
Cytokines are a diverse group of small proteins that play an important role in intercellular signaling [@doi:10.1128/MMBR.05015-11].

> This category includes interleukins, which are produced by and regulate the development of leukocytes, interferons, which play an antiviral and antiproliferative role in responding to viral threat, and tumor necrosis factors, which activate cytotoxic T-lymphocytes [@doi:10.1128/MMBR.05015-11; @doi:10.1097/AIA.0b013e318034194e].

Author: See below!

Cytokines can be both pro- and anti-inflammatory, which means they can either stimulate or inhibit the production of additional cytokines [@doi:10.1097/AIA.0b013e318034194e].

> Dysregulation is typically discussed in terms of excessive pro-inflammatory cytokine activity unchecked by the anti-inflammatory counterparts, which can therefore cause a cascade of the inflammatory response [@doi:10.1159/000087104].

Reviewer: Would it make sense to add a sentence about how persistent levels of inflammation can damage cells, which is why its dangerous

Cytokines have been investigated for their role in the immune response to lung infections long before the COVID-19 pandemic.

> Dysregulation of the inflammatory response, including elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, is found in patients with ARDS [@doi:10.1159/000087104].

Reviewer: This might be defined in an earlier section, but just wanted to check -- ARDS?

> One study of patients with and at risk for ARDS (specifically, those who were intubated for medical ventilation) found that shortly after the onset of ARDS, anti-inflammatory cytokine concentration in BALF increased relative to the concentration of pro-inflammatory cytokines [@doi:10.1164/ajrccm.164.10.2104013].

Reviewer: BALF?

However, patients with severe ARDS were excluded from this study.
The results suggest that an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) may signal the onset of ARDS, but recovery depends on an increased anti-inflammatory response [@doi:10.1164/ajrccm.164.10.2104013].
Acute phase response to an infection can also cause damage to the capillary endothelium, allowing leaks that disrupt the balance between pro-inflammatory cytokines and their regulators [@doi:10.1164/ajrccm.164.10.2104013].
Hyperactivity of the pro-inflammatory response due to lung infection is commonly associated with acute lung injury and more rarely with the more severe manifestation, ARDS [@doi:10.1128/MMBR.05015-11].
The heightened inflammatory response in the lungs can also serve as a source for systemic inflammation, or sepsis, which can lead to multi-organ failure [@doi:10.1128/MMBR.05015-11].

> The shift from local to systemic inflammation is a phenomenon often referred to broadly as a cytokine storm [@doi:10.1128/MMBR.05015-11] or a more precisely as cytokine release syndrome (CRS) [@doi:10.1186/s40425-018-0343-9].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The shift from local to systemic inflammation is a phenomenon often referred to broadly as a cytokine storm [@doi:10.1128/MMBR.05015-11] or, more precisely, as cytokine release syndrome (CRS) [@doi:10.1186/s40425-018-0343-9].
```

Sepsis is a known possible complication of pneumonia, and in an analysis of over 1400 US pneumonia patients, interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and IL-1&beta; were found to be elevated at intake in patients who developed severe sepsis and/or ultimately deceased [@doi:10.1001/archinte.167.15.1655].
IL-6 and TNF are pro-inflammatory cytokines, while IL-1&beta; is anti-inflammatory [@doi:10.1001/archinte.167.15.1655].
However, this study reported that unbalanced pro-/anti-inflammatory cytokine profiles were rare, although they measured only the three cytokines listed above.

> Prior work therefore makes it clear that pulmonary infection and injury are associated with systemic inflammation through sepsis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior work therefore made it clear that pulmonary infection and injury were associated with systemic inflammation through sepsis.
```

In this way, interleukins like IL-6 are integral to both the pro- and anti-inflammatory responses.

The inflammatory response was identified early on as a potential driver of COVID-19 outcomes due to existing research in SARS and emerging research in COVID-19.
In addition to the known role of cytokines in ARDS and lung infection more broadly, immunohistological analysis at autopsy of patients who deceased from SARS revealed that ACE2-expressing cells that were infected by SARS-CoV showed elevated expression of IL-6, IL-1&beta;, and TNF-&alpha; [@doi:10.1002/path.2067].
Similarly, the introduction of the S-protein from SARS-CoV to mouse macrophages was found to increase production of IL-6 and TNF-&alpha; [@doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2007.02.007].
For SARS-CoV-2 infection leading to COVID-19, early reports described a cytokine storm-like response in patients with particularly severe infections [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.24.963348; @doi:10/ggnzmc; @doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.06.017].

> Among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China, 59% developed sepsis, including 100% of the non-survivors [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30566-3].

Reviewer: Would it be helpful to have the number of total patients here to make more sense of the percentages?

Author: ```suggestion
Among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China, 112 out of 191 (59%) developed sepsis, including all 54 of the non-survivors [@doi:10/ggnxb3].
```
